---
layout: post
name: Fair Resource Distribution Algorithm v1
categories: [fedora]
tags: [algorithm, distribution, fair, resource, sharing]
math: true
permalink: /:title/
---

Imagine a finite resource that you want to distribute amongst peers in a fair
manner. If you know the number of peers to be `n`, the problem becomes
trivial and you can assign every peer `1/n`-th of the total. This way
every peer gets the same amount, while no part of the resource stays unused.
But what if the number of peers is only known retrospectively? That is, how
many resources do you grant a peer if you do not know whether there are more
peers or not? How do you define "fairness"? And how do you make sure as little
of the resource as possible stays unused?

The `fairdist` algorithm provides one possible solution to this problem. It
defines how many resources a new peer is assigned, considering the following
propertis:

 1. The total amount of resources already distributed to other peers. This is
    also referred to by the term `consumption`.
 2. The number of peers that already got resources assigned.
 3. The amount of resources remaining. That is, the resources that are
    remaining to be distributed. This is also referred to by the term
    `reserve`.

The following is a mathematical proof of the properties of the `fairdist`
algorithm. For the reference implementation of the algorithm and information on
the different applications of it, see the
[r-fairdist](https://r-util.github.io/r-fairdist) project.

## Prerequisites

We define a set of symbols up front, to keep the proofs shorter. Whenever these
symbols are mentioned, the following definition applies:

 * Let $$c \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$$ be a total amount of consumed resources.
 * Let $$r \in \mathbb{R}_{\geq 0}$$ be a total amount of reserved resources.
 * Let $$n \in \mathbb{N}_0$$ be a number of peers that consumed resources.
 * Let $$A: \mathbb{N}_0 \to \mathbb{R}_{>0}$$ be a function that computes
   the proportion of $$r$$ a peer can consume, based on the number of peers
   $$n$$ that currently have resources consumed.
 * Let $$G: \mathbb{N}_0 \to \mathbb{R}_{>0}$$ be a function that computes
   the proportion of $$c + r$$ a peer is guaranteed, based on the number of
   peers $$n$$ that currently have resources consumed.

>
> The algorithm considers a total amount of resources, but splits it into two
> separate parts, the remaining reserve $$r$$ and the consumed part $$c$$.
> Their sum represents the total amount that was initially available. It then
> declares a function $$A$$, which is the resource allocator. It will later on
> be used to calculate how many resources of the reserve a peer can allocate:
> $$\frac{r}{A(n)}$$. That is, $$A$$ defines the proportion of the reserve a
> new peer gets access to. The smaller it is, the more a peer gets.
>
> Similarly,
> the guarantee $$G$$ is used to declare a lower bound of the total resources
> the allocator $$A$$ grants a new peer. That is, while $$A$$ is a function
> applied to allocations, $$G$$ is a property the allocator will guarantee you.
> Unlike an allocation, $$G$$ will later on be calculated based on the total
> amount of resources: $$\frac{c + r}{G(n)}$$. Again, the function defines the
> proportion that is guaranteed. So the smaller $$G$$ is, the stronger the
> guarantee becomes.
>

## Definition

The allocator $$A$$ is said to guarantee the limit $$G$$, if there exists a
function $$R: \mathbb{N}_+ \to \mathbb{R}_{>0}$$ so that for all $$c$$,
$$r$$, and $$n$$:

$$r \geq \frac{c}{R(n)}$$

*implies both:*

 1. $$\frac{r}{A(n)} \geq \frac{c+r}{G(n)}$$
 2. $$r - \frac{r}{A(n)} \geq \frac{c + \frac{r}{A(n)}}{R(n+1)}$$

>
> The idea here is to define a function $$A$$ which calculates how many
> resources a new peer can allocate. That is, considering a new peer requests
> resources, it will get $$\frac{1}{A(n)}$$ of the reserve. The first property
> of this implication guarantees that this allocation is bigger than, or equal
> to, the guaranteed total for each peer. The guaranteed total is calculated
> through $$G$$ based on the total amount of resources (which is the
> consumption plus the reserve).
>
> If you now pick an allocator $$A$$ and a guarantee $$G$$ that fulfil this
> definition, the idea is that this ensures you that the allocator $$A$$ can be
> used to serve resource requests from new peers, and it ensures that
> regardless of how many peers will request resources, each one will be
> guaranteed an amount equal to, or bigger than, the guarantee $$G$$.
>
> This definition requires the existance of a reserve watermark $$R$$. It uses
> this watermark as a selector for an inductive step. That is, if the
> requirements of this reserve selector are true, the second implication
> guarantees that they are true for an infinite number of following
> allocations. That is, the right hand side of the second implication matches
> exactly the requirement of the implication, once a single allocation was
> performed (i.e., a resource chunk was subtracted from the reserve and added
> to the total consumption, while the number of peers increased by one).
>
> Note that if $$c$$ is $$0$$, then the requirement of the implication is true
> for all $$r$$ and $$R$$. This guarantees that there is always a situation
> where allocator $$A$$ can actually be applied.
>

## Lemma 1

To prove an allocator $$A$$ guarantees $$G$$, it is sufficient to show that
$$R$$ fulfils:

$$R(n) \leq \frac{G(n)}{A(n)} - 1$$

and

$$A(n) \geq \frac{1+R(n+1)}{R(n+1)-R(n)}$$

>
> This lemma is used to make it easier to prove a specific allocator guarantees
> a specific limit. Without it, each proof of the different allocators would
> have to replicate it.
>
> However, this lemma also gives a better feeling of what the different
> functions actually mean. For instance, it clearly shows $$A$$ must always be
> smaller than $$G$$, and that by a considerable amount. If $$A = G$$, then no
> $$R$$ would ever fulfil this requirement (remember: $$R(n) > 0$$). At the
> same time, you can see the closer $$A$$ and $$G$$ are together, the smaller
> $$R$$ gets, and as such the requirements on the reserve get harder to fulfil.
>
> The second requirement gives you a recursive equation to find an $$R$$ for
> any allocator you pick. Hence, in combination both these requirements show
> you an iterative process to find $$A$$ and $$R$$, for any guarantee $$G$$ you
> pick. However, the closer $$A$$ and $$G$$ get, the harder it becomes to solve
> the recursive equation.
>

### Proof

To show this lemma is true, we must show both implications of the definition
are true. As first step, we show the first implication is true, which is:

$$r \geq \frac{c}{R(n)} \implies \frac{r}{A(n)} \geq \frac{c+r}{G(n)}$$

We show this b starting with the left-hand side and showing it implies the
right hand side, using the requisite of this lemma.

$$
\begin{align}
r &\geq_{req} \frac{c}{R(n)}\\[8pt]
R(n) &\geq \frac{c}{r}\\[8pt]
\frac{G(n)}{A(n)} - 1 \geq_{req} R(n) &\geq \frac{c}{r}\\[8pt]
\frac{G(n)}{A(n)} - 1 &\geq \frac{c}{r}\\[8pt]
\frac{r G(n)}{A(n)} - r &\geq c\\[8pt]
\frac{r G(n)}{A(n)} &\geq c+r\\[8pt]
\frac{r}{A(n)} &\geq \frac{c+r}{G(n)}\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$

As second step, we need to show the second implication of the definition is
true, which is:

$$r \geq \frac{c}{R(n)} \implies r - \frac{r}{A(n)} \geq \frac{c + \frac{r}{A(n)}}{R(n+1)}$$

To prove this, we start with the second requisite of this lemma and then show
it implies the right-hand side of the implication, using the requisite of the
implication.

$$
\begin{align}
A(n) &\geq_{req} \frac{1+R(n+1)}{R(n+1)-R(n)}\\[16pt]
A(n)R(n+1) - A(n)R(n) &\geq 1+R(n+1)\\[16pt]
-A(n)R(n) &\geq 1+R(n+1) - A(n)R(n+1)\\[16pt]
A(n)R(n) &\leq A(n)R(n+1)-R(n+1)-1\\[16pt]
R(n) &\leq R(n+1) - \frac{R(n+1)}{A(n)} - \frac{1}{A(n)}\\[16pt]
\end{align}
$$

> Hint: The following introduction of $$c$$ is correct, since $$R(n)$$ is per
> definition greater than $$0$$, so neither side can be 0.

$$
\begin{align}
\frac{c}{R(n)} &\geq \frac{c}{R(n+1) - \frac{R(n+1)}{A(n)} - \frac{1}{A(n)}}\\[16pt]
r \geq_{req} \frac{c}{R(n)} &\geq \frac{c}{R(n+1) - \frac{R(n+1)}{A(n)} - \frac{1}{A(n)}}\\[16pt]
r &\geq \frac{c}{R(n+1) - \frac{R(n+1)}{A(n)} - \frac{1}{A(n)}}\\[16pt]
rR(n+1) - \frac{rR(n+1)}{A(n)} - \frac{r}{A(n)} &\geq c\\[16pt]
rR(n+1) - \frac{rR(n+1)}{A(n)} &\geq c + \frac{r}{A(n)}\\[16pt]
r - \frac{r}{A(n)} &\geq \frac{c + \frac{r}{A(n)}}{R(n+1)}\\[16pt]
\end{align}
$$

## Theorem

The following allocators each guarantee the specified limit:

$$
\begin{align}
A_1(n) &:= 2\\
G_1(n) &:= 2^{n+1} = \mathcal{O}(2^n)\\
\\
A_2(n) &:= n+2\\
G_2(n) &:= n^2+3n+2 = \mathcal{O}(n^2)\\
\\
A_3(n) &:= (n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2)\\
G_3(n) &:= \mathcal{O}(n \log_2(n)^2)\\
\end{align}
$$

>
> This theorem defines three different allocators for different guarantees. The
> last one provides the strongest guarantee. Both the allocation and the
> guarantee are quasilinear. It is thus a good fit for fair allocation schemes,
> while still being reasonably fast to compute.
>
> The other two provide quadratic and exponential guarantees and are mostly
> listed for documentational purposes. With the quasilinear guarantees at hand,
> there is little reason to use the other two.
>
> As you might notice, this theorem does not provide a solution where $$A$$ and
> $$G$$ become infinitesimally close. It remains open whether what this
> solution would look like. However, the listed quasilinear solution is good
> enough, that it is unlikely that better options exist, which can still be
> calculated in reasonable amounts of time.
>

### Proof

We provide a function $$R$$ for each pair. We then substitute them in _Lemma 1_
and show through equivalence transformations that the assertions are true.

#### Proof 1: Exponential Guarantee

 * _Allocator:_ $$A(n) := 2$$
 * _Guarantee:_ $$G(n) := 2^{n+1}$$

Let $$R(n) := 2^n - 1$$.

_Part 1:_

$$
\begin{align}
R(n) &\leq_{lemma} \frac{G(n)}{A(n)} - 1\\[8pt]
2^n - 1 &\leq \frac{2^{n+1}}{2} - 1\\[8pt]
2^n &= \frac{2^{n+1}}{2}\\[8pt]
2^n &= 2^n\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$

_Part 2:_

$$
\begin{align}
A(n) &\geq \frac{1+R(n+1)}{R(n+1)-R(n)}\\[8pt]
2 &\geq \frac{1+(2^{n+1} - 1)}{(2^{n+1} - 1)-(2^n - 1)}\\[8pt]
2 &\geq \frac{2^{n+1}}{2^{n+1} - 2^n}\\[8pt]
2 &\geq \frac{2^{n+1}}{2^{n+1}(1 - \frac{1}{2})}\\[8pt]
2 &\geq \frac{1}{1 - \frac{1}{2}}\\[8pt]
2 &\geq 2\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$

#### Proof 2: Polynomial Guarantee

 * _Allocator:_ $$A(n) := n+2$$
 * _Guarantee:_ $$G(n) := n^2 + 3n + 2$$

Let $$R(n) := n$$.

_Part 1:_

$$
\begin{align}
R(n) &\leq_{lemma} \frac{G(n)}{A(n)} - 1\\[8pt]
n &\leq \frac{n^2 + 3n + 2}{n+2} - 1\\[8pt]
n+1 &\leq \frac{n^2 + 3n + 2}{n+2}\\[8pt]
(n+1)(n+2) &\leq n^2 + 3n + 2\\[8pt]
n^2 + 3n + 2 &\leq n^2 + 3n + 2\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$

_Part 2:_

$$
\begin{align}
A(n) &\geq \frac{1+R(n+1)}{R(n+1)-R(n)}\\[8pt]
n+2 &\geq \frac{1+(n+1)}{(n+1)-(n)}\\[8pt]
n+2 &\geq \frac{n+2}{n-n+1}\\[8pt]
n+2 &\geq n+2\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$

#### Proof 3: Quasilinear Guarantee

 * _Allocator:_ $$A(n) := (n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2)$$
 * _Guarantee:_ $$G(n) := \mathcal{O}(n \log_2(n)^2)$$

Let $$R(n) := \log_2(n+1)$$.

_Part 1:_

$$
\begin{align}
R(n) &\leq_{lemma} \frac{G(n)}{A(n)} - 1\\[8pt]
\log_2(n+1) &\leq \frac{\mathcal{O}(n \log_2 (n)^2)}{(n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2)} - 1\\[8pt]
\log_2(n+1) + 1 &\leq \frac{\mathcal{O}(n \log_2 (n)^2)}{(n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2)}\\[8pt]
\log_2(n+1) + 1 &\leq \frac{\mathcal{O}(n \log_2 (n)^2)}{(n+2) (\log_2(n+2) + 1)}\\[8pt]
\log_2(n+1) + 1 \leq \log_2(n+2) + 1 &\leq \frac{\mathcal{O}(n \log_2 (n)^2)}{(n+2) (\log_2(n+2) + 1)}\\[8pt]
(\log_2(n+1) + 1)^2 &\leq \frac{\mathcal{O}(n \log_2 (n)^2)}{(n+2)}\\[8pt]
(n+2) \cdot (\log_2(n+1) + 1)^2 &\leq \mathcal{O}(n \cdot \log_2 (n)^2)\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$

_Part 2:_

For this part, we rely on the following property:

$$\frac{1}{n+1} \leq \log(n+1) - \log(n) \leq \frac{1}{n}$$

This is true for all logarithms for all $$n \in \mathbb{N}_+$$.

We now show the second requirement of the Lemma is true. However, we cannot use
equivalence transformations as in the other proofs. Hence, we show it by
implication.

$$
\begin{align}
n+2 &= n+2\\[8pt]
(n+2) (1+\log_2(n+2)) &= (n+2) (1+\log_2(n+2))\\[8pt]
(n+2) (1+\log_2(n+2)) &= \frac{1+\log_2(n+2)}{\frac{1}{n+2}}\\[8pt]
(n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2) &= \frac{1+\log_2(n+2)}{\frac{1}{n+2}}\\[8pt]
(n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2) &\geq \frac{1+\log_2(n+2)}{\log_2(n+2) - \log_2(n+1)}\\[8pt]
(n+2) \log_2(n+2) + (n+2) &\geq \frac{1+\log_2((n+1)+1)}{\log_2((n+1)+1) - \log_2(n+1)}\\[8pt]
A(n) &\geq \frac{1+R(n+1)}{R(n+1)-R(n)}\\[8pt]
\end{align}
$$
